The Android software development kit (SDK) includes a comprehensive set of development tools.[67] These include a debugger, libraries, a handset emulator (based on QEMU), documentation, sample code, and tutorials. Currently supported development platforms include computers running Linux (any modern desktop Linux distribution), Mac OS X 10.4.9 or later, Windows XP or later. The officially supported integrated development environment (IDE) is Eclipse (currently 3.4, 3.5 or 3.6) using the Android Development Tools (ADT) Plugin, though developers may use any text editor to edit Java and XML files then use command line tools (Java Development Kit and Apache Ant are required) to create, build and debug Android applications as well as control attached Android devices (e.g., triggering a reboot, installing software package(s) remotely).[68]
A preview release of the Android SDK was released on 12 November 2007. On 15 July 2008, the Android Developer Challenge Team accidentally sent an email to all entrants in the Android Developer Challenge announcing that a new release of the SDK was available in a "private" download area. The email was intended for winners of the first round of the Android Developer Challenge. The revelation that Google was supplying new SDK releases to some developers and not others (and keeping this arrangement private) led to widely reported frustration within the Android developer community at the time.[69]
On 18 August 2008 the Android 0.9 SDK beta was released. This release provided an updated and extended API, improved development tools and an updated design for the home screen. Detailed instructions for upgrading are available to those already working with an earlier release.[70] On 23 September 2008 the Android 1.0 SDK (Release 1) was released.[71] According to the release notes, it included "mainly bug fixes, although some smaller features were added". It also included several API changes from the 0.9 version. Multiple versions have been released since.[72]
Enhancements to Android's SDK go hand in hand with the overall Android platform development. The SDK also supports older versions of the Android platform in case developers wish to target their applications at older devices. Development tools are downloadable components, so after one has downloaded the latest version and platform, older platforms and tools can also be downloaded for compatibility testing.[73]
Android applications are packaged in .apk format and stored under /data/app folder on the Android OS (the folder is accessible to root user only for security reasons). APK package contains .dex files[74] (compiled byte code files called Dalvik executable), resource files, etc.
