Community journalism is locally oriented, professional news coverage that typically focuses on city neighborhoods, individual suburbs or small towns, rather than metropolitan, state, national or world news.
If it covers wider topics, the community journalism concentrates on the effect they have on local readers. Community newspapers, often but not always publish weekly, and also tend to cover subjects larger news media do not. Some examples are students on the honor roll at the local high school, school sports, crimes such as vandalism, zoning issues and other details of community life. Sometimes dismissed as "chicken dinner" stories, such "hyperlocal" coverage often plays a vital role in building and maintaining neighborhoods.
Leo Lerner, founder of Chicago's erstwhile Lerner Newspapers, used to say, "A fistfight on Clark Street is more important to our readers than a war in Europe."
An increasing number of community newspapers are now owned by large media organizations, although many rural papers are still "mom and pop" operations.
Community journalists are typically trained professional reporters and editors. Some specialized training programs have recently emerged at established undergraduate and graduate journalism programs. Community journalism should not be confused with the work of citizen journalists, who are often unpaid amateurs, or with Civic journalism, although many community newspapers practice that.
At the Emerging Mind of Community Journalism conference, participants created a list characterizing community journalism: community journalism is intimate, caring, and personal; it reflects the community and tells its stories; and it embraces a leadership role.
Community journalism got its name from a Montana Editor, Ken Byerly, while he was a professor of journalism at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 1957-71. Although the term is relatively new, Community journalism has been around since the founding fathers. He gave it its name because the concept had been referred to as “Hometown Newspapers”, which didn’t fit the suburban newspapers in that time. He chose Community journalism because it fit both the weeklies and small dailies of the day.