Fashion journalism is an umbrella term used to describe all aspects of published fashion media. It includes fashion writers, fashion critics or fashion reporters. The most obvious examples of fashion journalism are the fashion features in magazines and newspapers, but the term also includes books about fashion, fashion related reports on television as well as online fashion magazines, websites and blogs. Since pieces more often than not deal with "tendencies" and "trends", which are subjective by nature, and due to a sometimes tenuous relation with facts, the term "journalism" is used as a moniker, but does not carry the overall procedural and deontological aspects of professional journalism.
The work of a fashion journalist can be quite varied. Typical work includes writing or editing articles, or helping to formulate and style a fashion shoot. A fashion journalist typically spends a lot of time researching and/or conducting interviews and it is essential that he or she has good contacts with people in the fashion industry, including photographers, designers, and public relations specialists.
Fashion journalists are either employed full time by a publication or are employed on a freelance basis.
The career has grown in importance in other media with the release of films such as 'The Devil Wears Prada' and 'Confessions of a Shopaholic', and television series such as 'Ugly Betty'.
About half a year subsequent to pioneer fashion resource named Fashion Net's launch at the outset of 1995 came American Fashionmall and French ELLE. Fashion Live produced Internet's first live fashion webcast of Yves Saint Laurent's runway show in 1996. CNN Style and Hint Magazine arrived in 1998. The following year saw the rise and fall of 'Boo.com' as the company burned through $135 million in 18 months. 'Style.com', the online umbrella for Vogue and W, started in 2000. Style.com is not a journalistic website but a resource to show the complete collections of selected fashion shows each season. Following a tiff in 2007, W left Style.com making it the online home for Vogue alone. In the late 2000, Beauty Flow magazine flourished with exclusive content for editorials, portraits and reports.
Today, fashion blogs, and other such fashion portals such as 'coutureinthecity.com', 'glamour.com', 'fashionnetwork.com', are an increasing force in the fashion industry. Against this trend in August 2006 Westfield Group the world's largest mall and shopping centre owner has unveiled a Webzine titled What's What identifying popular fashion trends with a view to indirectly promote the products available in their tenants stores. The financial funding for such an undertaking is unique as it does not rely on subscriptions or advertising but entirely on advertorials.