Nothing says spring like a walk through the neighborhood and being able to smell the first blooming trees and flowers. It is great to live in a place where there are changing seasons. Each fall it seems like that is the best, then comes the winter holidays with their exciting traditions, but when its time for spring again, really there is nothing like it. all the types of flowers that pop out at different times, and the snow is melting from the trails, windows open and its nice inside and out.

Easter is a holiday that kicks off the spring season, traditionally with the like named Easter Lillies. Other types of flowers at Easter time are tulips, daffodils and hyacinths. A Christian holiday that comes from the resurrection of Jesus continues to be celebrated by non-Christians by the symbolism of new life and beginnings; nature is mirroring this in its natural cycle.

When the reluctant finally can't deny the good weather and jogging shoes, its springtime again while this exercise routine also gets a new beginning. By the third week, stomach cramps are less, endurance is stronger and finally there's less huffing and puffing to enjoy the bright greens and all spring types of flowers.

Jogging for a little while past Easter, is another holiday that is built all around sharing flowers and other greenery. May Day began in the pre-Christian era, in European and Celtic civilizations as a rite of spring. There are legends tracing it to honor the Roman goddess of flowers, Flora. Otherwise it is credited to pagan rituals. In the years around the fifteenth century, it was the main point of the holiday to welcome spring. May Day is the marker of the end of the winter months. Many accounts describe the typical May Day with community members, especially the ladies, out among the hills picking all types of flowers and branches and collecting them in a basket. These flowers would decorate the local homes and other places. There was dancing around the Maypole, which was also decorated with ribbons and types of flowers. Throughout the years, this took on specific traditions with types of flowers in different countries and areas of the world.

In Hawai'i, the Lei is honored, French give Lilly of the Valley, and wreaths in Greece. Some countries continue to celebrate it as Labor Day, however not in the United States. More contemporary thoughts of May Day are sharing flowers with neighbors and friends, if it is remembered at all.

Whatever the preference of holidays, a nice spring day is enough to celebrate. The movement from one holiday to the next, and preparing for warm and relaxing summer months, hopefully there is enough material to be distracted from the moving feet and the muscle aches. Jogging shoes can still be good friends and take us to the places where we can gather a handful of stems or a basketful of our own blossoms. The types of flowers that show up through the changing seasons into summer can keep on making it the best season yet.

Horticulture experts and casual not-so-green thumbs will all benefit from a little guidence about caring for different types of flowers. With a little know-how, we can be better at caring for the yard landscaping. When lucky enough to be treated with a bouquet for a vase, the flowers will last longer, and some will take this knowledge to grow a home nursery or small business.

One of the first parts in designing home landscaping is checking the growing conditions: is the area best suited for shady or sunny plants? What are the water conditions? What kind of soils are present? Answering these questions and knowing what agricultural zone you are in will help prepare ideas for the landscape. Different types of flowers flourish in some areas, where in another they won't grow or some types of flowers won't bloom well. This will narrow down the options for types of plants.

If there is a big space to fill with flowers and bedding plants, consider this idea. Come up with three different types of flowers, or categories: there should be fillers, a highlight group, then the centerpiece plants, in decreasing amounts. Scatter the area with about 50% of the fillers, 35% of the space with the highlight flowers, and 15% are for the centerpiece. When choosing different types of flowers for each category, the shortest flowers are the fillers, highlights are medium height and the centerpieces are the tallest, whatever that is according to your taste. This style of a big flower bed will create interest and unity. Figure out where you want the centerpieces, consider sprawling them out in partial curves throughout the bed, pad the highlight flowers up around the centerpieces, then use the rest of the space with the fillers. As you think of the different types of flowers that you like, in colors that compliment your theme, the design will come to life.

When you plan this kind of design into your landscape, there may be other plants along the borders and in other locations. Also while you choose what to plant all around, think about the blooming times that you are going to have in your yard. Different kinds of flowers have their show time at certain periods throughout the year. If you want to really drop the jaws of your neighbors for a packed two or three weeks, then choose flowers that all bloom at about the same time. Warning with this method, the rest of the weeks are going to be really boring at your place. Typically, landscapers choose plants that bring interest periodically, at alternate times of the other plants in the yard or flower bed. This way there is something to smile about all spring, summer, fall, and even in the winter.

If cut flowers are your thing, some types of flowers are better than others at showing off in a vase. As much as we all love the smell of lilacs, its really difficult to bring the natural scent indoors for more than a day. On the other hand, roses and even more so, mums, daisies and carnations last much longer.

Changing the water in the vase every day or every other day will help. Use warmer to room temperature water to help the plant soak it up. Also, when you first get your flowers, cut the ends again when you get to the kitchen sink. This fresh cut should be done on an angle, about 45 degrees, and under running water, then go straight into the vase. These guidelines will help the regular homeowner feel more like an expert, while still having their own time to stop and smell the flowers.
