Algorithms | Compilers | Computational Geometry | Computer Architecture
Computer Science | Engineering/Technology | Java |  Parallel Computing      

 
 Operating Systems Lecture Notes

Introduction
History of Operating Systems
Operating Systems Structure
System Component
Operating System Services
System Calls and System Programs
Layered Approach System Design
Mechanism and Policy
Process
Definition of Process  
Process State
Process Operations
Process Control Block
Threads
Solaris-2 Operating Systems
CPU/Process Scheduling
Schedule Algorithm
FCFS Scheduling
Round Robin Scheduling
SJF Scheduling
SRT Scheduling
Priority Scheduling
Multilevel Queue Scheduling
Multilevel Feedback Queue Scheduling
Interprocess Communication
Critical Section
Mutual Exclusion
Achieving Mutual Exclusion
Semaphores
Deadlock
Necessary and Sufficient Deadlock Conditions
Dealing with Deadlock Problem
Deadlock Prevention
Deadlock Avoidance
Deadlock Detection
Absolutely Important UNIX Commands
References


 Operating Systems Review -- by Shikha Ghosh Gottfried.
 IEEE Distributed Systems Online
 Problem Reporting and Tracking System at CS Computer Systems
 

 

 Links

Cryptology ePrint Archive -- provides rapid access to recent research in cryptology. Papers have been placed here by the authors and did not undergo any refereeing process other than verifying that the work seems to be within the scope of cryptology and meets some minimal acceptance criteria
How Operating Systems Work
Operating System Developers homepage
Overview of Projects on Distributed Operating Systems -- at Department of CS, U. of Ulm.
Review of Operating Systems
Virtual Network Computing - VNC -- Access Personal Computer remotely
Win2VNC -- a dual-screen hack for Windows. This program will let you use two screens on two different computers as if they were connected to the same computer. It even works between different operating systems.
 Books & Tutorials

Cryptography and Network Security by William Stallings | Resources
Multithreaded Programming with ThreadMentor: A Tutorial by C.-K. Shene
Operating System Design & Implementation - Tutorial  -- by Mohan Raj Dhanagopal.
Operating System Concepts Sixth Edition by Abraham Silberschatz  , Peter Baer Galvin  and Greg Gagne
Operating Systems, Fourth Edition by William Stallings | Resources
 Nachos

Guide to Nachos 5.0j by Dan Hettena & Rick Cox -- Nachos and Java.
Nachos -- General Nachos documentation at U. of Washington.
Nachos User-Level Remote Debugging With GDB -- at U. of Kansas.
Reading Nachos Source Code -- by Michael O'Donnell, University of Chicago
Road Map Through Nachos -- by Thomas Narten at Duke U.
    High-level overview of the source code which can be used as companion to overcome the initial learning curve encountered when learning and using the system.
Salsa -- An Operating Systems Tutorial -- by Archna Kalra at U.Mass Amherst.
 Programming

cpp-home -- wide range of C++ tutorials and codes.
cprogramming.com
C-lesson by Christopher Sawtell -- This archive contains a complete course to learn the 'C' computer language itself.
LEARN C/C++ TODAY -- Annotated collection of tutorials on both C and C++.
 

 Viewers

Adobe (PDF)
Java 3D Viewer
GhostView (PS)
Microsoft Office Online File Converters & Viewers -- with help of these programs one can share Microsoft Office files with people who have different versions of Office programs, or even with people who don't have Office installed.
Online viewer for PDF, PostScript and Word
 

 Unix Resources

Frequently Used UNIX Commands
Information on basic UNIX commands
Locally-created Unix Man Pages for selected commands at KSU.
UNIX (Digital Documentation Library)
Unix's FAQ List
UNIX Glossary 
Unix Guru Universe -- official page for UNIX System Administrators
Unix Help for Users
UNIX LINUX & Variants
UNIX Pocket Reference List
Unix Reference Desk
Unix Services
 

 Linux Resources

Learning Linux.com  -- Information and support for Linux users and those interested in learning the Linux operating system
Linux Applications & Utilities -- open source, commercial, freeware & shareware tools & lot more.
Linux Knowledge base and Tutorial
Linux Guide  -- a  glossary of Linux terms and definitions with a sophisticated search engine
Linux Headquaters
LinuxMall.com
Linux Online -- great introductory site
Linux & UNIX Resources 
Scientific Applications on Linux (SAL) -- collection of information and links to software that will be of interest to scientists and engineers.
Setting up Mail Services in Linux
 

 Redhat

Installing the Server-mode of @ Mail under RedHat ES4
Learnthat.com -- Tutorials, Online Courses, and Help.
Netikus -- downloadable guides including mail server installation.
Red Hat
Red Hat Enterprise Linux ES 4 Release Notes -- Installation-related and Package-specific notes.
 

 Online Books On UNIX

Unix Unleashed

 Related Resources

Computer Systems at KSU
Installing TeraTerm Pro  --  A freeware terminal emulator/telnet client for Windows.
Network File System Overview -- The Network File System (NFS) is a distributed file system that allows users to access files and directories located on remote computers and treat those files and directories as if they were local.
Domain name Lookup
 Gnome

Gnome -- official site
 
 
 

There is no place like  Home
