
Pop music (a term that originally derives from an abbreviation of 
"popular") is usually understood to be commercially recorded music, 
often oriented towards a youth market, usually consisting of 
relatively short, simple songs utilizing technological innovations
 to produce new variations on existing themes. Pop music has absorbed 
influences from most other forms of popular music, but as a genre is
 particularly associated with the rock and roll and later rock style.

Hatch and Millward define pop music as "a body of music which is 
distinguishable from popular, jazz and folk musics".Although pop music
 is often seen as oriented towards the singles charts it is not the sum
 of all chart music, which has always contained songs from a variety of
 sources, including classical, jazz, rock, and novelty songs, while pop
 music as a genre is usually seen as existing and developing separately
.Thus "pop music" may be used to describe a distinct genre, aimed at a 
youth market, often characterized as a softer alternative to rock and roll.

Throughout its development, pop music has absorbed influences from most other
 genres of popular music. Early pop music drew on the sentimental ballad for
 its form, gained its use of vocal harmonies from gospel and soul music, 
instrumentation from jazz, country, and rock music, orchestration from classical
 music, tempo from dance music, backing from electronic music, rhythmic elements
 from hip-hop music, and has recently appropriated spoken passages from rap.

Musicologists often identify the following characteristics as typical of the pop music genre:

an aim of appealing to a general audience, rather than to a particular sub-culture or ideology.
an emphasis on craftsmanship rather than formal "artistic" qualities.
an emphasis on recording, production, and technology, over live performance.
a tendency to reflect existing trends rather than progressive developments.
much pop music is intended to encourage dancing, or it uses dance-oriented beats or rhythms.

The main medium of pop music is the song, often between two and a half and three and a half 
minutes in length, generally marked by a consistent and noticeable rhythmic element, a 
mainstream style and a simple traditional structure.[15] Common variants include the 
verse-chorus form and the thirty-two-bar form, with a focus on melodies and catchy hooks,
 and a chorus that contrasts melodically, rhythmically and harmonically with the verse.
The beat and the melodies tend to be simple, with limited harmonic accompaniment.
 The lyrics of modern pop songs typically focus on simple themes – often love and
romantic relationships – although there are notable exceptions.

Harmony in pop music is often "that of classical European tonality, only more simple-minded."
 Clichés include the barbershop harmony (i.e. moving from a secondary dominant harmony to a 
dominant harmony, and then to the tonic) and blues scale-influenced harmony.
"The influence of the circle-of-fifths paradigm has declined since the mid-1950s. 
The harmonic languages of rock and soul have moved away from the all-encompassing 
influence of the dominant function. ...There are other tendencies 
(perhaps also traceable to the use of a guitar as a composing instrument) – 
pedal-point harmonies, root motion by diatonic step, modal harmonic and melodic
 organization – that point away from functional tonality and toward a tonal sense 
that is less directional, more free-floating."