Ludwig van Beethoven (baptised 17 December 1770[2]–26 March 1827) was a German composer and pianist. The crucial figure in the transition
 between the Classical and Romantic eras in Western art music, he remains one of the most famous and influential composers of all time.

Born in Bonn, then the capital of the Electorate of Cologne and part of the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation in present-day Germany,
 Beethoven moved to Vienna in his early 20s, studying with Joseph Haydn and quickly gaining a reputation as a virtuoso pianist. His hearing
 began to deteriorate in the late 1790s, yet he continued to compose, conduct, and perform, even after becoming completely deaf.

Between 1798 and 1802 Beethoven tackled what he considered the pinnacles of composition: the string quartet and the symphony. 
With the composition of his first six string quartets (Op. 18) between 1798 and 1800 (written on commission for, and dedicated to, 
Prince Lobkowitz), and their publication in 1801, along with premieres of the First and Second Symphonies in 1800 and 1802, Beethoven 
was justifiably considered one of the most important of a generation of young composers following Haydn and Mozart. He continued to write
 in other forms, turning out widely known piano sonatas like the "Pathétique" sonata (Op. 13), which Cooper describes as "surpass[ing] any 
of his previous compositions, in strength of character, depth of emotion, level of originality, and ingenuity of motivic and tonal
 manipulation."He also completed his Septet (Op. 20) in 1799, which was one of his most popular works during his lifetime.

Beethoven is acknowledged as one of the giants of classical music; occasionally he is referred to as one of the "three Bs" 
(along with Bach and Brahms) who epitomise that tradition. He was also a pivotal figure in the transition from the 18th century musical
 classicism to 19th century romanticism, and his influence on subsequent generations of composers was profound.

Beethoven composed in several musical genres, and for a variety of instrument combinations. His works for symphony orchestra 
include nine symphonies (the Ninth Symphony includes a chorus), and about a dozen pieces of "occasional" music. He wrote seven 
concerti for one or more soloists and orchestra, as well as four shorter works that include soloists accompanied by orchestra. 
His only opera is Fidelio; other vocal works with orchestral accompaniment include two masses and a number of shorter works.