Bagpipes are a class of musical instrument, aerophones, using enclosed reeds fed from a constant reservoir of air in the form of a bag.
 Though the Scottish Great Highland Bagpipe and Irish uilleann pipes have the greatest international visibility, bagpipes of many different
 types come from different regions throughout Europe, Northern Africa, the Persian Gulf, and the Caucasus.

The term is equally correct in the singular or plural, although in the English language, pipers most commonly talk of "pipes."

A set of bagpipes minimally consists of an air supply, a bag, a chanter, and usually a drone. Most bagpipes also have additional drones 
(and sometimes chanters) in various combinations, held in place in stocks—connectors that fasten the various pipes to the bag.

Evidence of pre-medieval bagpipes is uncertain, but several textual and visual clues may possibly indicate ancient forms of bagpipes.
 The "Oxford History of Music" makes mention of the first documented bagpipe being found on a Hittite slab at Eyuk in the Middle East. 
This sculptured bagpipe has been dated to 1000 BC. In the 2nd century AD, Suetonius described the Roman Emperor Nero as a player of the 
tibia utricularis.Dio Chrysostom, who also flourished in the 1st century, wrote about a contemporary sovereign (possibly Nero) who could 
play a pipe ("aulein") with his mouth as well as with his "armpit".From this account, some believe that the tibia utricularis was a bagpipe.

Dozens of types of bagpipes today are widely spread across Europe and the Middle East, as well as through much of the former British Empire.
 The name bagpipe has almost become synonymous with its best-known form, the Great Highland Bagpipe, overshadowing the great number and 
variety of traditional forms of bagpipe. Despite the decline of these other types of pipes over the last few centuries, in recent years 
many of these pipes have seen a resurgence or even revival as traditional musicians have sought them out; for example, the Irish piping 
tradition, which by the mid 20th century had declined to a handful of master players is today alive, well, and flourishing a situation 
similar to that of the Asturian gaita, the Galician gaita, the Aragonese gaita de boto, Northumbrian smallpipes, the Breton biniou, the 
Balkan gaida, the Black Sea tulum, the Scottish smallpipes and pastoral pipes, as well as other varieties.