Johann Sebastian Bach (21 March 1685, O.S.31 March 1685, N.S. – 28 July 1750, N.S.) was a German composer, organist, harpsichordist, violist,
 and violinist whose sacred and secular works for choir, orchestra, and solo instruments drew together the strands of the Baroque period and
 brought it to its ultimate maturity.Although he did not introduce new forms, he enriched the prevailing German style with a robust 
contrapuntal technique, an unrivalled control of harmonic and motivic organisation, and the adaptation of rhythms, forms and textures
 from abroad, particularly from Italy and France.

Revered for their intellectual depth, technical command and artistic beauty, Bach's works include the Brandenburg Concertos, the Goldberg
 Variations, the Partitas, The Well-Tempered Clavier, the Mass in B minor, the St Matthew Passion, the St John Passion, the Magnificat, 
A Musical Offering, The Art of Fugue, the English and French Suites, the Sonatas and Partitas for solo violin, the Cello Suites, more than
 200 surviving cantatas, and a similar number of organ works, including the famous Toccata and Fugue in D minor and Passacaglia and Fugue 
in C minor, as well as the Great Eighteen Chorale Preludes and Organ Mass.

Bach's abilities as an organist were highly respected throughout Europe during his lifetime, although he was not widely recognised as a
 great composer until a revival of interest and performances of his music in the first half of the 19th century. He is now generally
 regarded as one of the main composers of the Baroque style, and as one of the greatest composers of all time.

Bach was best known during his lifetime as an organist, organ consultant, and composer of organ works in both the traditional German 
free genres—such as preludes, fantasias, and toccatas—and stricter forms, such as chorale preludes and fugues. He established a 
reputation at a young age for his great creativity and ability to integrate foreign styles into his organ works. A decidedly North German
 influence was exerted by Georg Böhm, with whom Bach came into contact in Lüneburg, and Dieterich Buxtehude in Lübeck, whom the young
 organist visited in 1704 on an extended leave of absence from his job in Arnstadt. Around this time, Bach copied the works of numerous
 French and Italian composers to gain insights into their compositional languages, and later arranged violin concertos by Vivaldi and 
others for organ and harpsichord. His most productive period (1708–14) saw the composition of several pairs of preludes and fugues and
 toccatas and fugues, and of the Orgelbüchlein ("Little organ book"), an unfinished collection of 45 short chorale preludes that 
demonstrate compositional techniques in the setting of chorale tunes. After he left Weimar, Bach's output for organ fell off, although
 his best-known works (the six trio sonatas, the "German Organ Mass" in Clavier-Übung III from 1739, and the "Great Eighteen" chorales,
 revised late in his life) were all composed after this time. Bach was extensively engaged later in his life in consulting on organ 
projects, testing newly built organs, and dedicating organs in afternoon recitals.One of the high points may be the third part
 of the Clavier-Übung, a setting of 21 chorale preludes uniting the traditional Catholic Missa with the Lutheran catechism liturgy,
 the whole set interpolated between the mighty "St. Anne" Prelude and Fugue on the theme of the Trinity.