The violin is a string instrument, usually with four strings tuned in perfect fifths. It is the smallest, 
highest-pitched member of the violin family of string instruments, which includes the viola and cello.

The violin is sometimes informally called a fiddle, regardless of the type of music played on it. The word violin 
comes from the Middle Latin word vitula, meaning stringed instrument; this word is also believed to be the source of the
 Germanic "fiddle". The violin, while it has ancient origins, acquired most of its modern characteristics in 16th-century Italy,
 with some further modifications occurring in the 18th century. Violinists and collectors particularly prize the instruments made 
by the Gasparo da Salò, Giovanni Paolo Maggini, Stradivari, Guarneri and Amati families from the 16th to the 18th century in Brescia
 and Cremona and by Jacob Stainer in Austria. Great numbers of instruments have come from the hands of "lesser" makers, as well as
 still greater numbers of mass-produced commercial "trade violins" coming from cottage industries in places such as Saxony, Bohemia,
 and Mirecourt. Many of these trade instruments were formerly sold by Sears, Roebuck and Co. and other mass merchandisers.

A person who makes or repairs violins is called a luthier, or simply a violin maker. The parts of a violin are usually made from 
different types of wood (although electric violins may not be made of wood at all, since their sound may not be dependent on specific 
acoustic characteristics of the instrument's construction), and it is usually strung with gut, nylon or other synthetic, or steel strings.

Someone who plays the violin is called a violinist or a fiddler. The violinist produces sound by drawing a bow across one or more strings
 (which may be stopped by the fingers of the other hand to produce a full range of pitches), by plucking the strings (with either hand),
 or by a variety of other techniques. The violin is played by musicians in a wide variety of musical genres, including Baroque music,
 classical, jazz, folk music, and rock and roll. The violin has come to be played in many non-western music cultures all over the world.

    Turkic and Mongolian horsemen from Inner Asia were probably the world’s earliest fiddlers. Their two-stringed upright
 fiddles were strung with horsehair strings, played with horsehair bows, and often feature a carved horse’s head at the end 
of the neck. ... The violins, violas, and cellos we play today, and whose bows are still strung with horsehair, are a legacy of
 the nomads.

It is believed that these instruments eventually spread to China, India, the Byzantine Empire and the Middle East, where they 
developed into instruments such as the erhu in China, the rebab in the Middle East, the lyra in the Byzantine Empire and the esraj 
in India. The violin in its present form emerged in early 16th-Century Northern Italy, where the port towns of Venice and Genoa 
maintained extensive ties to central Asia through the trade routes of the silk road.