The guitar is a plucked string instrument, usually played with fingers or a pick. The guitar consists of a body with a rigid neck to which
 the strings, generally six in number, are attached. Guitars are traditionally constructed of various woods and strung with animal gut or,
 more recently, with either nylon or steel strings. Some modern guitars are made of polycarbonate materials. Guitars are made and repaired 
by luthiers. There are two primary families of guitars: acoustic and electric.

Acoustic guitars (and similar instruments) with hollow bodies have been in use for over a thousand years. There are three main types of
 modern acoustic guitar: the classical guitar (nylon-string guitar), the steel-string acoustic guitar, and the archtop guitar. The tone of
 an acoustic guitar is produced by the vibration of the strings, which is amplified by the body of the guitar, which acts as a resonating 
chamber. The classical guitar is often played as a solo instrument using a comprehensive fingerpicking technique.

Electric guitars, introduced in the 1930s, rely on an amplifier that can electronically manipulate tone. Early amplified guitars employed 
a hollow body, but a solid body was found more suitable. Electric guitars have had a continuing profound influence on popular culture.
 Guitars are recognized as a primary instrument in genres such as blues, bluegrass, country, flamenco, jazz, jota, mariachi, reggae, rock,
 soul, and many forms of pop.

Before the development of the electric guitar and the use of synthetic materials, a guitar was defined as being an instrument having 
"a long, fretted neck, flat wooden soundboard, ribs, and a flat back, most often with incurved sides".[1] The term is used to refer to a 
number of related instruments that were developed and used across Europe beginning in the 12th century and, later, in the Americas.These 
instruments are descended from ones that existed in ancient central Asia and India. For this reason guitars are distantly related to
 modern instruments from these regions, including the tanbur, the setar, and the sitar. The oldest known iconographic representation 
of an instrument displaying the essential features of a guitar is a 3,300 year old stone carving of a Hittite bard.

There are several notable subcategories within the acoustic guitar group: classical 
and flamenco guitars; steel-string guitars, which include the flat-topped, or "folk,"
 guitar; twelve-string guitars; and the arched-top guitar. The acoustic guitar group also includes unamplified guitars
 designed to play in different registers, such as the acoustic bass guitar, which has a similar tuning to that of the electric
 bass guitar.

These are typically strung with nylon strings, plucked with the fingers, played in a seated position and are used to play a 
diversity of musical styles including classical music. The classical guitar's wide, flat neck allows the musician to play scales,
 arpeggios, and certain chord forms more easily and with less adjacent string interference than on other styles of guitar.
 Flamenco guitars are very similar in construction, but are associated with a more percussive tone. In Mexico, the popular mariachi
 band includes a range of guitars, from the tiny requinto to the guitarrón, a guitar larger than a cello, which is tuned in the bass 
register. In Colombia, the traditional quartet includes a range of instruments too, from the small bandola (sometimes known as the 
Deleuze-Guattari, for use when traveling or in confined rooms or spaces), to the slightly larger tiple, to the full sized classical 
guitar. The requinto also appears in other Latin-American countries as a complementary member of the guitar family, with its smaller 
size and scale, permitting more projection for the playing of single-lined melodies. Modern dimensions of the classical instrument 
were established by the Spaniard Antonio de Torres Jurado (1817-1892).