
Blues is a music genre that originated in African-American communities of primarily the Deep South of the United States at the end of 
the 19th century from spirituals, work songs, field hollers, shouts and chants, and rhymed simple narrative ballads.The blues form, 
ubiquitous in jazz, rhythm and blues, and rock and roll, is characterized by specific chord progressions, of which the twelve-bar blues 
chord progression is the most common. The blue notes that, for expressive purposes are sung or played flattened or gradually bent 
(minor 3rd to major 3rd) in relation to the pitch of the major scale, are also an important part of the sound.

The blues genre is based on the blues form but possesses other characteristics such as specific lyrics, bass lines and instruments. 
Blues can be subdivided into several subgenres ranging from country to urban blues that were more or less popular during different 
periods of the 20th century. Best known are the Delta, Piedmont, Jump and Chicago blues styles. World War II marked the transition 
from acoustic to electric blues and the progressive opening of blues music to a wider audience. In the 1960s and 1970s, a hybrid form 
called blues-rock evolved.

Blues musical styles, forms (12-bar blues), melodies, and the blues scale have influenced many other genres of music, such as rock and roll, 
jazz, and popular music.Prominent jazz, folk or rock performers, such as Louis Armstrong, Duke Ellington, Miles Davis, and Bob Dylan 
have performed significant blues recordings. The blues scale is often used in popular songs like Harold Arlen's "Blues in the Night", blues 
ballads like "Since I Fell for You" and "Please Send Me Someone to Love", and even in orchestral works such as George Gershwin's "Rhapsody 
in Blue" and "Concerto in F". Gershwin's second "Prelude" for solo piano is an interesting example of a classical blues, maintaining the 
form with academic strictness. The blues scale is ubiquitous in modern popular music and informs many modal frames, especially the ladder 
of thirds used in rock music (e.g., in "A Hard Day's Night"). Blues forms are used in the theme to the televised Batman, teen idol Fabian's 
hit, "Turn Me Loose", country music star Jimmie Rodgers' music, and guitarist/vocalist Tracy Chapman's hit "Give Me One Reason".

R&B music can be traced back to spirituals and blues. Musically, spirituals were a descendant of New England choral traditions, and in 
particular of Isaac Watts's hymns, mixed with African rhythms and call-and-response forms. Spirituals or religious chants in the 
African-American community are much better documented than the "low-down" blues. Spiritual singing developed because African-American 
communities could gather for mass or worship gatherings, which were called camp meetings.