Henry Purcell ( 10 September 1659 – 21 November 1695), was an English organist and Baroque composer of secular and sacred music. 
Although Purcell incorporated Italian and French stylistic elements into his compositions, his legacy was a uniquely English form of
 Baroque music.

After his death, Purcell was honoured by many of his contemporaries, including his old friend John Blow,
 who wrote "An Ode, on the Death of Mr. Henry Purcell (Mark how the lark and linnet sing)" with text by his old collaborator,
 John Dryden. More recently, the English poet Gerard Manley Hopkins wrote a famous sonnet entitled simply "Henry Purcell", 
with a headnote reading: "The poet wishes well to the divine genius of Purcell and praises him that, whereas other musicians
 have given utterance to the moods of man's mind, he has, beyond that, uttered in notes the very make and species of man as created
 both in him and in all men generally."

Purcell also had a strong influence on the composers of the English musical renaissance of the early twentieth century,
 most notably Benjamin Britten, who created and performed a realisation of Dido and Aeneas and whose The Young Person's 
Guide to the Orchestra is based on a theme from Purcell's Abdelazar. Stylistically, the aria "I know a bank" from Britten's
 opera A Midsummer Night's Dream is clearly inspired by Purcell's aria "Sweeter than Roses", which Purcell originally wrote as 
part of incidental music to Richard Norton's Pausanias, the Betrayer of His Country.

Purcell is among the Baroque composers who has had a direct influence on modern rock and roll; according to Pete Townshend 
of The Who, Purcell was among his influences, particularly evident in the opening bars of The Who's "Pinball Wizard".The processional
 section from Purcell's "Music for the Funeral of Queen Mary," was also adapted for the synthesizer by Wendy Carlos to serve as the
 theme music for the 1971 film A Clockwork Orange. Noted cult New Wave artist Klaus Nomi regularly performed "The Cold Song" from King 
Arthur during his career, including a version on his debut self-titled album, Klaus Nomi, from 1981; his last public performance before 
his untimely death was an interpretation of the piece done with a full orchestra in December 1982 in Munich. Purcell wrote the song for a
 bass, but numerous countertenors have performed the piece in homage to Nomi.

In the 21st century, the soundtrack of the 2005 film version of Pride and Prejudice features a dance titled "A Postcard to Henry Purcell.
" This is a version by composer Dario Marianelli of Purcell's Abdelazar theme. In the German-language 2004 movie, Der Untergang ([the] 
Downfall (film), the music of Dido's Lament is used repeatedly as the end of the Third Reich culminates.