Franz Joseph Haydn (31 March[1] 1732 – 31 May 1809), known as Joseph Haydn , was an Austrian composer, one of the most prolific and
 prominent composers of the Classical period. He is often called the "Father of the Symphony" and "Father of the String Quartet" because 
of his important contributions to these forms. He was also instrumental in the development of the piano trio and in the evolution of sonata
 form.

A central characteristic of Haydn's music is the development of larger structures out of very short, simple musical motifs,
 often derived from standard accompanying figures. The music is often quite formally concentrated, and the important musical events
 of a movement can unfold rather quickly.

Haydn's work was central to the development of what came to be called sonata form. His practice, however, differed in some ways from that of
 Mozart and Beethoven, his younger contemporaries who likewise excelled in this form of composition. Haydn was particularly fond of the 
so-called "monothematic exposition", in which the music that establishes the dominant key is similar or identical to the opening theme. 
Haydn also differs from Mozart and Beethoven in his recapitulation sections, where he often rearranges the order of themes compared to the 
exposition and uses extensive thematic development.

Haydn's formal inventiveness also led him to integrate the fugue into the classical style and to enrich the rondo form with more
 cohesive tonal logic. Haydn was also the principal exponent of the double variation form—variations on two alternating themes, which
 are often major- and minor-mode versions of each other.

Perhaps more than any other composer's, Haydn's music is known for its humor.The most famous example is the sudden loud chord in the
 slow movement of his "Surprise" symphony; Haydn's many other musical jokes include numerous false endings 
(e.g., in the quartets Op. 33 No. 2 and Op. 50 No. 3), and the remarkable rhythmic illusion placed in the trio section of the third 
movement of Op. 50 No. 1.

Much of the music was written to please and delight a prince, and its emotional tone is correspondingly upbeat.This tone also reflects, 
perhaps, Haydn's fundamentally healthy and well-balanced personality. Occasional minor-key works, often deadly serious in character, form 
striking exceptions to the general rule. Haydn's fast movements tend to be rhythmically propulsive and often impart a great sense of
 energy, especially in the finales. Some characteristic examples of Haydn's "rollicking" finale type are found in the "London" 
symphony No. 104, the string quartet Op. 50 No. 1, and the piano trio Hob XV: 27. Haydn's early slow movements are usually not too slow
 in tempo, relaxed, and reflective. Later on, the emotional range of the slow movements increases, notably in the deeply felt slow movements
 of the quartets Op. 76 Nos. 3 and 5, Symphony No. 98, Symphony No. 102, and piano trio Hob XV: 23. The minuets tend to have a strong
 downbeat and a clearly popular character. As early as Op. 33 (1781) Haydn turned some of his minuets into "scherzi" which are much faster
, at one beat to the bar.