
Celtic music is a term utilised by artists, record companies, music 
stores and music magazines to describe a broad grouping of musical 
genres that evolved out of the folk musical traditions of the Celtic 
people of Western Europe. As such there is no real body of music which 
can be accurately described as Celtic, but the term has stuck and may 
refer to both orally-transmitted traditional music and recorded popular
music.

Celtic music means two things mainly. First, it is the music of the 
peoples calling themselves Celts (a non-musical, primarily political 
definition), as opposed to, say, "French music" or "English music." 
Secondly, it refers to whatever qualities may be unique to the musics 
of the Celtic Nations (a musical definition). Some insist that different
 ostensibly Celtic musics actually have nothing in common-–such as 
Geoff Wallis and Sue Wilson in their book The Rough Guide to Irish 
Music-–whereas others (such as Alan Stivell), say they do.

Often, the term Celtic music is applied to the music of Ireland and 
Scotland because both lands have produced well-known distinctive 
styles which actually have genuine commonality and clear mutual 
influences; however, it is notable that Irish and Scottish traditional 
musicians themselves avoid the term "Celtic music," except when forced 
by the necessities of the market. The definition is further complicated
 by the fact that Irish independence has allowed Ireland to promote 
'Celtic' music as a specifically Irish product. In reality, the terms 
'Scots/Scottish' and 'Irish' are purely modern geographical references 
to a people who share a common Celtic ancestry and consequently, a 
common musical heritage.

Identifying "common characteristics" of Celtic music is problematic.
 Most of the popular musical forms now thought of as characteristically
 "Celtic" were once common in many places in Western Europe. There is 
debate over whether jigs were adapted from the Italian gigue, a common 
form of the baroque era, for example, while polkas have their 
origin in Czech and Polish tradition.

On the other hand, there are musical genres and styles specific to 
each Celtic country, due in part to the influence of individual song 
traditions and the characteristics of specific languages. Strathspeys 
are specific to Highland Scotland, for example, and it has been 
hypothesized that they mimic the rhythms of the Scottish Gaelic 
language.