
Jazz is a musical tradition and style of music that originated at the 
beginning of the 20th century in African American communities in the 
Southern United States from a confluence of African and European music 
traditions. From its early development until the present, jazz has 
incorporated music from 19th and 20th century American popular music. 
Its West African pedigree is evident in its use of blue notes, 
improvisation, polyrhythms, syncopation, and the swung note.
The word "jazz" (in early years also spelled "jass") began as a 
West Coast slang term and was first used to refer to music in Chicago 
in about 1915.
From its beginnings in the early 20th century jazz has spawned a variety
 of subgenres: New Orleans Dixieland dating from the early 1910s, big 
band-style swing from the 1930s and 1940s, bebop from the mid-1940s, a 
variety of Latin jazz fusions such as Afro-Cuban and Brazilian jazz, 
free jazz from the 1950s and 1960s, jazz fusion from the 1970s, acid 
jazz from the 1980s (which added funk and hip-hop influences), and 
Nujazz in the 1990s. As the music has spread around the world it has 
drawn on local, national, and regional musical cultures, its aesthetics 
being adapted to its varied environments and giving rise to many 
distinctive styles.
Jazz can be very hard to define because it spans from Ragtime marches 
to 2000s-era fusion. Attempts have been made to define jazz from the 
perspective of other musical traditions—using the point of view of 
European music history or African music for example—but jazz critic 
Joachim Berendt argues that all such attempts are unsatisfactory. One 
way to get around the definitional problems is to define the term "jazz" 
more broadly. Berendt defines jazz as a "form of art music which 
originated in the United States through the confrontation of blacks 
with European music"; he argues that jazz differs from European music 
in that jazz has a "special relationship to time, defined as 'swing'", 
"a spontaneity and vitality of musical production in which improvisation 
plays a role"; and "sonority and manner of phrasing which mirror the 
individuality of the performing jazz musician".
While jazz may be difficult to define, improvisation is clearly one of 
its key elements. Early blues was commonly structured around a 
repetitive call-and-response pattern, a common element in the African 
American oral tradition. A form of folk music which rose in part from 
work songs and field hollers of rural Blacks, early blues was also 
highly improvisational. These features are fundamental to the nature of 
jazz. While in European classical music elements of interpretation, 
ornamentation and accompaniment are sometimes left to the performer's 
discretion, the performer's primary goal is to play a composition as 
it was written.
In jazz, however, the skilled performer will interpret a tune in very 
individual ways, never playing the same composition exactly the same 
way twice. Depending upon the performer's mood and personal experience, 
interactions with fellow musicians, or even members of the audience, 
a jazz musician/performer may alter melodies, harmonies or time 
signature at will. The jazz soloist is supported by a rhythm section 
who "comp", by playing chords and rhythms that outline the song 
structure and complement the soloist. European classical music has 
been said to be a composer's medium. Jazz, however, is often 
characterized as the product of egalitarian creativity, interaction 
and collaboration, placing equal value on the contributions of 
composer and performer, 'adroitly weigh[ing] the respective claims 
of the composer and the improviser'.

