The saxophone (also referred to as the sax) is a conical-bore transposing musical instrument that is a member of the woodwind family.
 Saxophones are usually made of brass and played with a single-reed mouthpiece similar to that of the clarinet. The saxophone was 
invented by the Belgian Adolphe Sax in 1841. He wanted to create an instrument that would both be the most powerful and vocal of 
the woodwinds and the most adaptive of the brass, which would fill the then vacant middle ground between the two sections. He patented
 the sax on June 28, 1846 in two groups of seven instruments each. Each series consisted of instruments of various sizes in alternating
 transposition. The series pitched in B flat and E flat, designed for military bands, has proved extremely popular and most saxophones 
encountered today are from this series. A few saxophones remain from the less popular orchestral series pitched in C and F. These 
instruments never gained a foothold in the orchestral world. Although the C-melody was quite popular in the late 20's and early 30's 
as a parlor instrument it never gained a legitimate standing. Instruments keyed in F are rare.

While proving very popular in military band music, the saxophone is most commonly associated with popular music, big band music, blues,
 early rock and roll, ska and particularly jazz. There is also a substantial repertoire of concert music in the classical idiom for the 
members of the saxophone family. Saxophone players are called saxophonists.

The saxophone consists of an approximately conical tube of thin metal, most commonly brass and sometimes plated with silver, gold,
 and nickel, flared at the tip to form a bell. At intervals along the tube are between 20 and 23 tone holes of varying size, including 
two very small 'speaker' holes to assist the playing of the upper register. These holes are covered by keys (also known as pad cups), 
containing soft leather pads, which are closed to produce an airtight seal; at rest some of the holes stand open and others are closed.
 The keys are controlled by buttons pressed by the fingers, while the right thumb sits under a thumb rest to help keep the saxophone 
balanced. The fingering for the saxophone is a combination of that of the oboe with the Boehm system, and is very similar to the flute 
or the upper register of the clarinet. Instruments that play to low A have a left thumb key for that note.

The saxophone first gained popularity in the niche it was designed for: the military band. Although the instrument was studiously 
ignored in Germany, French and Belgian military bands took full advantage of the instrument that Sax had designed specifically for them.
 Most French and Belgian military bands incorporate at least a quartet of saxophones comprising at least the E flat baritone, B flat tenor,
 E flat alto and B flat soprano. These four instruments have proved the most popular of all of Sax's creations, with the E flat contrabass
 and B flat bass usually considered impractically large and the E flat sopranino insufficiently powerful. British military bands tend to
 include at minimum two saxophonists on the alto and tenor.

By far, the most well-known implementation of the saxophone is modern jazz music. This is usually as a solo instrument with a rhythm
 section, but sometimes in the form of a saxophone quartet or big band.