
Classical music is the art music produced in, or rooted in, 
the traditions of Western liturgical and secular music, 
encompassing a broad period from roughly the 11th century to 
present times. The central norms of this tradition became 
codified between 1550 and 1900, which is known as the common 
practice period.
European music is largely distinguished from many other non-European
 and popular musical forms by its system of staff notation, in use 
since about the 16th century. Western staff notation is used by 
composers to prescribe to the performer the pitch, speed, meter, 
individual rhythms and exact execution of a piece of music. This 
leaves less room for practices such as improvisation and ad libitum 
ornamentation, that are frequently heard in non-European art music 
(compare Indian classical music and Japanese traditional music) and 
popular music. The term "classical music" did not appear until the 
early 19th century, in an attempt to "canonize" the period from 
Johann Sebastian Bach to Beethoven as a golden age. The earliest 
reference to "classical music" recorded by the Oxford English 
Dictionary is from about 1836. 

CHARACTERISTICS
The most outstanding and particular characteristic of classical 
music is that the repertoire tends to be written down. Composers 
and performers alike are typically highly literate in understanding 
notation and the written quality of the music has, in addition to
 preserving the works, led to a sometimes astounding level of 
complexity within them.

The instruments used in most classical music were largely invented 
before the mid-19th century (often much earlier), and codified in 
the 18th and 19th centuries. They consist of the instruments found 
in an orchestra, together with a few other solo instruments 
(such as the piano, harpsichord, and organ).

Electric instruments such as the electric guitar appear occasionally 
in the classical music of the 20th and 21st centuries. Both classical 
and popular musicians have experimented in recent decades with 
electronic instruments such as the synthesizer, electric and digital 
techniques such as the use of sampled or computer-generated sounds, 
and the sounds of instruments from other cultures such as the gamelan.
Whereas the majority of popular styles lend themselves to the song form,
 classical music can also take on the form of the concerto, symphony, 
sonata, opera, dance music, suite, etude, symphonic poem, and others.
Performance of classical music repertoire often demands a significant 
level of technical mastery on the part of the musician; proficiency in 
sight-reading and ensemble playing, thorough understanding of tonal and
 harmonic principles, knowledge of performance practice, and a 
familiarity with the style/musical idiom inherent to a given period, 
composer or musical work are among the most essential of skills for 
the classically trained musician.

