The tabla  is a popular Indian percussion instrument (of the membranophone family) used in Hindustani classical music and in popular
 and devotional music of the Indian subcontinent. The instrument consists of a pair of hand drums of contrasting sizes and timbres.
 The term 'tabla is derived from an Arabic word, tabl, which simply means "drum."

Playing technique involves extensive use of the fingers and palms in various configurations to create a wide variety of different sounds,
 reflected in the mnemonic syllables (bol). The heel of the hand is used to apply pressure or in a sliding motion on the larger drum 
so that the pitch is changed during the sound's decay.

The smaller drum, played with the dominant hand, is sometimes called dayan but is correctly called the "tabla." It is made from a 
conical piece of mostly teak and rosewood hollowed out to approximately half of its total depth. The drum is tuned to a specific note,
 usually either the tonic, dominant or sub-dominant of the soloist's key and thus complements the melody. The tuning range is limited 
although different dayañ-s are produced in different sizes, each with a different range. Cylindrical wood blocks, known as ghatta, are 
inserted between the strap and the shell allowing tension to be adjusted by their vertical positioning. Fine tuning is achieved while
 striking vertically on the braided portion of the head using a small hammer.

The larger drum, played with the other hand, is called bayañ . The bayañ has a much deeper bass tone, much like its distant cousin,
 the kettle drum. The bayañ may be made of any of a number of materials. Brass is the most common, copper is more expensive, but
 generally held to be the best, while aluminum and steel are often found in inexpensive models. One sometimes finds that wood is used, 
especially in old bayañs from the Punjab. Clay is also used, although not favored for durability; these are generally found in the 
North-East region of Bengal.

Currently there are two traditional notation systems called as Pt. Bhatkhande and Pt. Paluskar Notation System. However, these notation
 systems are incomplete. Pt. Bhatkhande Notation system does not account for any Jati and Laya. Whereas Pt. Paluskar Notation system does
 not account for Khanda or Mishra Jati. It is also inadequate for laya in Tigun or Chougun (Three times or Four Times). Recently Sanjeev
 Shelar from Aurangabad,India has developed a new notation system, which is complete in all respect. It not only shows the Matra in various
 Jati and Laya, but it also shows how Nikas is done on tabla. The tabla notation system is available in three languages as English, Hindi
 and Marathi.