A drum kit (also drum set,or trap set) is a collection of drums, cymbals and often other percussion instruments, such as 
cowbells, wood blocks, triangles, chimes, or tambourines, arranged for convenient playing by a single person (drummer).

The individual instruments of a drum-set are hit by a variety of implements held in the hand, including sticks, brushes, and mallets.
 Two notable exceptions include the bass drum, played by a foot-operated pedal, and the hi-hat cymbals, which may be struck together 
using a foot pedal in addition to being played with sticks or brushes. Although other instruments can be played using a pedal, the feet
 are usually occupied by the bass drum and hi hat, and as a result the drummer often plays in a seated position. Percussion notation is 
often used by drummers to signify which drum set components are to be played. A full size drum set without any additional percussion
 instruments has a bass drum, floor tom, snare drum, tom-toms, and a variety of cymbals including hi-hat cymbals, ride cymbal and a crash
 cymbal. The Rev of Avenged Sevenfold used three bass drums as well as the drummer from Atreyu. Alex van Halen has used four bass drums
 in the past. Various music genres dictate the stylistically appropriate use of the drum kit's set-up. For example, in most forms of rock 
music, the bass drum, hi-hat and snare drum are the primary instruments used to create a drum beat, whereas in jazz, ride and snare
 patterns tend to be more prevalent and the hi-hat is played by the foot. In the 2000s, an increasing number of drummers have begun 
to use electronic drum pads which trigger synthesized or sampled drum sounds.

Drum kits have ranged in size and components from old style jazz/dance hall kits through to modern rock/techno kits.

Drum kits are infants of the Vaudeville era. Pecuniary and theater space considerations demanded that fewer percussionists 
covered more percussion parts. In military and orchestral music settings, drums and cymbals were traditionally played separately
 by one or many percussionists. The bass drum, snare drum, cymbals and other percussion instruments were played by hand. Circa 1890,
 experimentation with foot pedals began. Liberating the hands for the first time, this evolution saw the bass drum played (first standing)
 with the foot of a percussionist and became the central piece around which every other percussion instruments would later revolve. 
Ludwig-Musser, William F. Ludwig Senior and his brother Theodor Ludwig founded the Ludwig & Ludwig Co. in 1909 and patented the first
 workable bass drum pedal system, paving the way for what was to become the modern drum kit