The flute is a musical instrument of the woodwind family. Unlike woodwind instruments with reeds, a flute is an aerophone or
 reedless wind instrument that produces its sound from the flow of air across an opening. According to the instrument 
classification of Hornbostel-Sachs, flutes are categorized as Edge-blown aerophones.

A musician who plays the flute can be referred to as a flute player, a flautist, a flutist, or less commonly a fluter.

Aside from the voice, flutes are the earliest known musical instruments. A number of flutes dating to about 40,000 to 35,000
 years ago have been found in the Swabian Alb region of Germany. These flutes demonstrate that a developed musical tradition
 existed from the earliest period of modern human presence in Europe.

The oldest flute ever discovered may be a fragment of the femur of a juvenile cave bear,
 with two to four holes, found at Divje Babe in Slovenia and dated to about 43,000 years ago.
 The authenticity of this fact, however, is often disputed.

A flute produces sound when a stream of air directed across a hole in the instrument creates a vibration of air at the hole.

The air stream across this hole creates a Bernoulli, or siphon. This excites the air contained in the usually cylindrical resonant 
cavity within the flute. The player changes the pitch of the sound produced by opening and closing holes in the body of the instrument,
 thus changing the effective length of the resonator and its corresponding resonant frequency. By varying the air pressure, a flute player
 can also change the pitch of a note by causing the air in the flute to resonate at a harmonic other than the fundamental 
frequency without opening or closing any holes.

To be louder, a flute must use a larger resonator, a larger air stream, or increased air stream velocity. A flute's volume can
 generally be increased by making its resonator and tone holes larger. This is why a police whistle, a form of flute, is very wide
 for its pitch, and why a pipe organ can be far louder than a concert flute: a large organ pipe can contain several cubic feet of air,
 and its tone hole may be several inches wide, while a concert flute's air stream measures a fraction of an inch across.

The air stream must be directed at the correct angle and velocity, or else the air in the flute will not vibrate. In fippled or 
ducted flutes, a precisely formed and placed windway will compress and channel the air to the labium ramp edge across the open window.
 In the pipe organ, this air is supplied by a regulated blower.