Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart , baptismal name Johannes Chrysostomus Wolfgangus Theophilus Mozart , was a
 prolific and influential composer of the Classical era. He composed over 600 works, many acknowledged as pinnacles of symphonic,
 concertante, chamber, piano, operatic, and choral music. He is among the most enduringly popular of classical composers.

Mozart showed prodigious ability from his earliest childhood in Salzburg. Already competent on keyboard and violin, he composed from
 the age of five and performed before European royalty. At 17, he was engaged as a court musician in Salzburg, but grew restless and
 travelled in search of a better position, always composing abundantly. While visiting Vienna in 1781, he was dismissed from his Salzburg
 position. He chose to stay in the capital, where he achieved fame but little financial security. During his final years in Vienna, he
 composed many of his best-known symphonies, concertos, and operas, and portions of the Requiem, which was largely unfinished at the time 
of Mozart's death. The circumstances of his early death have been much mythologized. He was survived by his wife Constanze and two sons.

Mozart learned voraciously from others, and developed a brilliance and maturity of style that encompassed the light and graceful along 
with the dark and passionate. His influence on subsequent Western art music is profound. Beethoven wrote his own early compositions in
 the shadow of Mozart, of whom Joseph Haydn wrote that "posterity will not see such a talent again in 100 years.

Mozart's music, like Haydn's, stands as an archetype of the Classical style. At the time he began composing, European music
 was dominated by the style galant, a reaction against the highly evolved intricacy of the Baroque. Progressively, and in large
 part at the hands of Mozart himself, the contrapuntal complexities of the late Baroque emerged once more, moderated and disciplined
 by new forms, and adapted to a new aesthetic and social milieu. Mozart was a versatile composer, and wrote in every major genre,
 including symphony, opera, the solo concerto, chamber music including string quartet and string quintet, and the piano sonata. 
These forms were not new, but Mozart advanced their technical sophistication and emotional reach. He almost single-handedly developed
 and popularized the Classical piano concerto. He wrote a great deal of religious music, including large-scale masses, but also dances,
 divertimenti, serenades, and other forms of light entertainment.

The central traits of the Classical style are all present in Mozart's music. Clarity, balance, and transparency are the hallmarks 
of his work, but simplistic notions of its delicacy mask the exceptional power of his finest masterpieces, such as the Piano Concerto 
No. 24 in C minor, K. 491, the Symphony No. 40 in G minor, K. 550, and the opera Don Giovanni.
