
Country music (or Country and Western) is a blend of traditional 
and popular musical forms traditionally found in the Southern 
United States and the Canadian Maritimes that evolved rapidly 
beginning in the 1920s.[1] Distinctive variations of the genre 
have also emerged elsewhere including Australian country music.

The term country music gained popularity in the 1940s when the 
earlier term hillbilly music came to be seen as denigrating. 
Country music was widely embraced in the 1970s, while country 
and Western has declined in use since that time, except in the 
United Kingdom and Ireland, where it is still commonly used.
However, in the Southwestern United States a different mix of 
ethnic groups created the music that became the Western music 
of the term Country and Western. The term country music is used 
today to describe many styles and subgenres.

In the 1990s, alternative country came to refer to a diverse 
group of musicians and singers operating outside the traditions 
and industry of mainstream country music. In general, they 
eschewed the high production values and pop outlook of the 
Nashville-dominated industry, to produce music with a lo-fi sound, 
frequently infused with a strong punk and alternative aesthetic, 
bending the traditional rules of country music. Lyrics were often 
bleak, gothic or socially aware. Other initiators include Old 97's, 
Lyle Lovett, Steve Earle, Uncle Tupelo, Son Volt, Ryan Adams, and 
Drive-By Truckers.

Outside of the US, Canada has the largest country music fan and 
artist base. Mainstream country music is culturally ingrained in 
the Maritimes and the prairie provinces: areas with large numbers 
of rural residents. Canadian country music originated in Atlantic 
Canada in the form of British and Irish folk music popular amongst
 Irish and Scottish immigrants to Canada's Maritime Provinces 
(Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and Prince Edward Island). Like the 
southern United States and Appalachia, all three regions are of 
heavy British Isles stock and rural; as such, The development of 
country music in the Maritimes mirrored the development of country
 music in the US south and Appalachia.