Giovanni Gabrieli (c. 1554/1557 – 12 August 1612) was an Italian composer and organist. He was one of the most influential musicians
 of his time, and represents the culmination of the style of the Venetian School, at the time of the shift from Renaissance to
 Baroque idioms.

Though Gabrieli composed in many of the forms current at the time, he preferred sacred vocal and instrumental music. All of his
 secular vocal music is relatively early; he never wrote lighter forms, such as dances; and late in his career he concentrated 
on sacred vocal and instrumental music that exploited sonority for maximum effect.[3] Among the innovations credited to him – and 
while he was not always the first, he was the most famous to do these things – were the use of dynamics; the use of specifically notated
 instrumentation (as in the famous Sonata pian' e forte); and the use of massive forces arrayed in multiple, spatially separated groups,
an idea which was to be the genesis of the Baroque concertato style, and which spread quickly to northern Europe, both by the report of 
visitors to Venice and by Gabrieli's students, which included Hans Leo Hassler and Heinrich Schütz.

Like composers before and after him, he would use the unusual layout of the San Marco church, with its two choir lofts facing
 each other, to create striking spatial effects. Most of his pieces are written so that a choir or instrumental group will first be 
heard on one side, followed by a response from the musicians on the other side; often there was a third group situated on a stage near
 the main altar in the center of the church.While this polychoral style had been extant for decades (Adrian Willaert may have made use
 of it first, at least in Venice) Gabrieli pioneered the use of carefully specified groups of instruments and singers, 
with precise directions for instrumentation, and in more than two groups. The acoustics were and are such in the church that instruments, 
correctly positioned, could be heard with perfect clarity at distant points. Thus instrumentation which looks strange on paper,
 for instance a single string player set against a large group of brass instruments, can be made to sound, in San Marco, in perfect
 balance.

Gabrieli's first motets were published alongside his uncle Andrea's compositions in his 1587 volume of Concerti. These pieces show much
 influence of his uncle's style in the use of dialogue and echo effects.There are low and high choirs and the difference between
 their pitches is marked by the use of instrumental accompaniment. The motets published in Giovanni's 1597 Sacrae Symphoniae seem to
 move away from this technique of close antiphony towards a model in which musical material is not simply echoed, but developed by
 successive choral entries. Some motets, such as Omnes Gentes developed the model almost to its limits. In these motets, instruments
 are an integral part of the performance, and only the choirs marked "Capella" are to be performed by singers for each part.

There seems to be a distinct change in Gabrieli's style after 1605, the year of publication of Monteverdi's Qinto libro di madrigale, 
and Gabrieli's compositions are in a much more homophonic style as a result. There are sections purely for instruments - called "Sinfonia"
 - and small sections for soloists singing florid lines, accompanied simply by a basso continuo. "Alleluia" refrains provide refrains 
within the structure, forming rondo patterns in the motets, with close dialogue between choirs and soloists. In particular, one of his
 best-known pieces, In Ecclesiis, is a showcase of such polychoral techniques, making use of four separate groups of instrumental and 
singing performers, underpinned by the omnipresent organ and continuo.