
Rock music is a genre of popular music that developed during and after 
the 1960s, particularly in the United States and the United Kingdom. 
It has its roots in 1940s and 1950s rock and roll, itself heavily 
influenced by rhythm and blues and country music. Rock music also 
drew strongly on a number of other genres such as blues and folk, 
and incorporated influences from jazz, classical and other musical 
sources.

Musically, rock has centred around the electric guitar, usually as 
part of a rock group with bass guitar and drums. Typically, rock is 
song-based music with a 4/4 beat utilizing a verse-chorus form, but 
the genre has become extremely diverse and common musical 
characteristics are difficult to define. Like pop music, lyrics often 
stress romantic love but also address a wide variety of other themes 
that are frequently social or political in emphasis. The dominance of 
rock by white, male musicians has been seen as one of the key factors 
shaping the themes explored in rock music. Unlike pop music, rock 
places an emphasis on musicianship, live performance, and an ideology 
of authenticity.

The sound of rock is traditionally centered around the electric 
guitar, which emerged in its modern form in the 1950s with the 
popularization of rock and roll.The sound of the electric guitar 
in rock music is typically supported by the electric bass guitar 
pioneered in jazz music in the same era,and percussion produced from 
a drum kit that combines drums and cymbals.This trio of instruments 
has often been complemented by the inclusion of others, particularly 
keyboards such as the piano, Hammond organ and synthesizers.A group of 
musicians performing rock music is termed a rock band or rock group 
and typically consists of two and five members. Most traditionally, 
a rock band takes the form of a quartet whose members cover one or 
more roles, including vocalist, lead guitarist, rhythm guitarist, 
bass guitarist, drummer and occasionally that of keyboard player or 
other instrumentalist.