Franz Peter Schubert January 31, 1797 – November 19, 1828) was an Austrian composer.

Although he died at an early age, Schubert was tremendously prolific. He wrote some 600 Lieder, 
nine symphonies (including the famous "Unfinished Symphony"), liturgical music, operas, some incidental music, and a large body of 
chamber and solo piano music. Appreciation of his music during his lifetime was limited, but interest in Schubert's work increased 
dramatically in the decades following his death at the age of 31. Franz Liszt, Robert Schumann, Johannes Brahms and Felix Mendelssohn,
 among others, discovered and championed his works in the 19th Century. Today, Schubert is admired as one of the leading exponents of 
the early Romantic era in music and he remains one of the most frequently performed composers.

The compositions of 1819 and 1820 show a marked advance in development and maturity of style.The unfinished oratorio "Lazarus"
 (D. 689) was begun in February; later followed, amid a number of smaller works, by the 23rd Psalm (D. 706), the Gesang der Geister
 (D. 705/714), the Quartettsatz in C minor (D. 703), and the "Wanderer Fantasy" for piano (D. 760). Of most notable interest is the
 staging in 1820 of two of Schubert's operas: Die Zwillingsbrüder (D. 647) appeared at the Theater am Kärntnertor on June 14,
 and Die Zauberharfe (D. 644) appeared at the Theater an der Wien on August 21. Hitherto, his larger compositions 
(apart from his masses) had been restricted to the amateur orchestra at the Gundelhof, a society which grew out of the quartet-parties
 at his home. Now he began to assume a more prominent position, addressing a wider public. Publishers, however, remained distant, 
with Anton Diabelli hesitantly agreeing to print some of his works on commission.The first seven opus numbers (all songs) appeared on 
these terms; then the commission ceased, and he began to receive the meager pittances which were all that the great publishing houses 
ever accorded to him. The situation improved somewhat in March 1821 when Vogl sang "Der Erlkönig" at a concert that was extremely well 
received. That month, he composed a variation on a waltz by Anton Diabelli (D. 718), being one of the fifty composers who
 contributed to Vaterländischer Künstlerverein.

Schubert wrote almost 1000 works in a remarkably short career. The largest number (over 600) of these are songs. 
He wrote seven complete symphonies, as well as the two movements of the "Unfinished" Symphony, a complete sketch
 (with partial orchestration) of a ninth, and arguable fragments of a 10th. There is a large body of music for solo piano,
 including 21 complete sonatas and many short dances, and a relatively large set of works for piano duet. There are nearly 30 
chamber works, including some fragmentary works. His choral output includes six masses. He wrote only five operas, and no concertos.

That "appetite for experimentation" manifests itself repeatedly in Schubert's output in a wide variety of forms and genres,
 including opera, liturgical music, chamber and solo piano music, and symphonic works. Perhaps most familiarly, his adventurousness
 manifests itself as a notably original sense of modulation, as in the second movement of the String Quintet, where he modulates from
 C major, through E major, to reach the tonic key of C# major.It also appears in unusual choices of instrumentation, as in the Arpeggione
 Sonata or the unconventional scoring of the Trout Quintet. If it not infrequently led Schubert up blind alleys, resulting in fragmentary 
works, it also enabled him to create music unlike anything that had come before, such as his two song cycles of unprecedented scope.