
The origins of Indian classical music can be found in the Vedas, which are the oldest scriptures in the Hindu tradition. Indian classical 
music has also been significantly influenced by, or syncretised with, Indian folk music and Persian music. The Samaveda, one of the four 
Vedas, describes music at length. The Samaveda was derived from the Rigveda so that its hymns could be sung as Samagana; this style evolved
 into jatis and eventually into ragas. Bharat's Natyashastra was the first treatise laying down fundamental principles of dance, music, and 
drama.

Indian classical music is both elaborate and expressive. Like Western classical music, it divides the octave into twelve semitones of which the
 seven basic notes are, in ascending tonal order, Sa Re Ga Ma Pa Dha Ni Sa for Hindustani music and Sa Ri Ga Ma Pa Dha Ni Sa for Carnatic music,
 similar to Western music's Do Re Mi Fa Sol La Ti Do. However, Indian music uses just-intonation tuning, unlike most modern Western 
classical music, which uses the equal-temperament tuning system.

Indian classical music is monophonic in nature and based around a single melody line, which is played over a fixed drone. The performance 
is based melodically on particular ragas and rhythmically on talas. Because of the focus on exploring the raga, performances have 
traditionally been solo endeavors, but duets are gaining in popularity.

Indian music is traditionally taught via oral methods, and until the 20th century did not employ notations as the primary media of 
instruction, understanding, or transmission. The rules of Indian music and compositions themselves are taught from a guru to a shishya,
 in person. Various Indian music schools follow notations and classifications (see Melakarta and thaat); however, the notation is 
regarded as a matter of taste and is not standardized. Scholars of Europe in the seventeenth and eighteenth century were enamoured 
by Indian music, and with no facility to record the sound, they looked for some existing system that might express sounds in the 
composition. There were references to an ancient notation system which scholars had also translated into Persian; still, the complexity
 of Indian classical music was difficult to express in writing. Nowadays, a system created by Bhatkhande is used. Another system has
 been proposed which uses symbols and offers instantaneous comprehension like the staff notation system.

Instruments typically used in Hindustani music include the sitar, sarod, surbahar, tanpura, bansuri, shehnai, sarangi, santoor, pakhavaj
 and tabla. Instruments typically used in Carnatic music include venu, gottuvadyam, harmonium, veena, mridangam, kanjira, ghatam and violin.

The fundamental authoritative work on the subject of Indian instruments, Bharatiya Sangeet Vadya, was based on years of research carried
 out by Dr. Lalmani Misra.

Carnatic music, from South India, tends to be significantly more structured than Hindustani music. Examples of this are the logical 
classification of ragas into melakarthas, and the use of fixed compositions similar to Western classical music. Carnatic raga elaborations
 are generally much faster in tempo and shorter than their equivalents in Hindustani music. The opening piece is called a varnam, and is 
a warm-up for the musicians. A devotion and a request for a blessing follows, then a series of interchanges between ragams (unmetered melody) 
and thaalams (the ornamentation, equivalent to the jor). This is intermixed with hymns called krithis. The pallavi or theme from the raga 
then follows. Carnatic pieces also have notated lyrical poems that are reproduced as such, possibly with embellishments and treatments 
according to the performer's ideology; these pieces are called compositions.