The music of Japan includes a wide array of performers in distinct styles both traditional and modern. The word for music in Japanese 
is ongaku.Japan is the second largest music market in the world,behind the United States,and most of the market is dominated by Japanese
 artists.

Local music often appears at karaoke venues, which is on lease from the record labels.
 Traditional Japanese music has no specific beat[clarification needed], and is calm. 
The music is improvised most of the time. In 1873, a British traveler claimed that Japanese music, 
"exasperates beyond all endurance the European breast."

The oldest forms of traditional Japanese music are shomyo ,
 Buddhist chanting, and gagaku , orchestral court music, both of which date to the Nara and Heian periods.
Gagaku is a type of classical music that has been performed at the Imperial court since the Heian period. 
Kagurauta, Azumaasobi and Yamatouta  are relatively indigenous repertories. Togaku and komagaku originated 
from the Chinese Tang dynasty via the Korean peninsula. In addition, gagaku is divided into kangen (instrumental music) and
 bugaku (dance accompanied by gagaku).

Gagaku is a type of classical music that has been performed at the Imperial court since the Heian period. Kagurauta , Azumaasobi
 and Yamatouta are relatively indigenous repertories. Togaku and komagaku originated from the Chinese Tang dynasty via the Korean 
peninsula. In addition, gagaku is divided into kangen(instrumental music) and bugaku (dance accompanied by gagaku).

Originating as early as the 13th century are honkyoku "original pieces". These are single (solo) shakuhachi pieces played by 
mendicant Fuke sect priests of Zen buddhism. These priests, called komuso ("emptiness monk"), played honkyoku for alms and 
enlightenment. The Fuke sect ceased to exist in the 19th century, but a verbal and written lineage of many honkyoku continues 
yesterday, though this music is now often practiced in a concert or performance setting.

The samurai often listened to and performed in these music activities, in their practices of enriching their lives and 
understanding.
Noh is usually accompanied by music, uta and hayashi 

Musical theater also developed in Japan from an early age. Noh arose out of various more popular traditions and by the 14th century
 had developed into a highly refined art. It was brought to its peak by Kan'ami (1333–1384) and Zeami (1363?-1443). In particular
 Zeami provided the core of the Noh repertory and authored many treatises on the secrets of the Noh tradition (until the modern era
 these were not widely read).

Another form of Japanese theater is the puppet theater, often known as bunraku . This traditional puppet theater also has
 roots in popular traditions and flourished especially during Chonin in the Edo period (1600–1868)[citation needed]. It is
 usually accompanied by recitation (various styles of joruri) accompanied by shamisen music.

During the Edo period actors (after 1652 only male adults) performed the lively and popular kabuki theater. Kabuki, which could 
feature anything from historical plays to dance plays, was often accompanied by nagauta style of singing and shamisen performance.