A symphony is an extended musical composition in Western classical music, scored almost always for orchestra. "Symphony" does not 
necessarily imply a specific form, though most are composed according to the sonata principle. Many symphonies are tonal works in 
four movements with the first in sonata form, which is often described by music theorists as the structure of a "classical" symphony, 
although many symphonies by the acknowledged classical masters of the form, Joseph Haydn, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, and Ludwig van 
Beethoven do not conform to this model.

In the 17th century, for most of the Baroque period, the terms symphony and sinfonia were used for a range of different compositions, 
including instrumental pieces used in operas, sonatas and concertos—usually part of a larger work. The opera sinfonia, or Italian 
overture had, by the 18th century, a standard structure of three contrasting movements: fast, slow, fast and dance-like. It is this
 form that is often considered as the direct forerunner of the orchestral symphony. The terms "overture", "symphony" and "sinfonia"
 were widely regarded as interchangeable for much of the 18th century.

The "Italian" style of symphony, often used as overture and entr'acte in opera houses, became a standard three movement form: 
a fast movement, a slow movement, and then another fast movement. Haydn and Mozart, whose early symphonies were in this layout, 
eventually replaced it with a four-movement layout, through the addition of an additional middle movement (Prout 1895, 249), 
which became dominant in the latter part of the 18th century and most of the 19th century. This symphonic form was influenced 
by Germanic practice, and would come to be associated with the "classical style" of Haydn and Mozart. "Normative macro-symphonic 
form may be defined as the four-movement form, in general, employed in the later symphonies of Haydn and Mozart, and in those of 
Beethoven" (Jackson 1999, 26).

The normal four-movement form became, then (Jackson 1999, 26; Stein 1979, 106):

    an opening sonata or allegro
    a slow movement, such as adagio
    a minuet with trio or "Beethoven four-movement solo sonata": scherzo
    an allegro, rondo, or sonata

Variations on this layout were common, for instance the order of the middle two movements, or the addition of a slow 
introduction to the first movement. Older composers such as Haydn and Mozart restricted their use of the four-movement 
form to orchestral or multi-instrument chamber music such as quartets, though since Beethoven solo sonatas are as often 
written in four as in three movements (Prout 1895, 249). Tchaikovsky's Third Symphony has a five-movement form through 
the addition of an "Alla tedesca" 'movement' between the first and the second (Jackson 1999, 26).

Beethoven dramatically expanded the symphony. His Symphony No. 3 (the Eroica), has a scale and emotional range that sets it 
apart from earlier works. His Symphony No. 5 is arguably the most famous symphony ever written. His Symphony No. 9 takes the 
unprecedented step (for a symphony) of including parts for vocal soloists and choir in the last movement, making it a choral 
symphony (however, a minor composer, Daniel Steibelt had written a piano concerto with a choral finale four years earlier, in 1820). 
Hector Berlioz, who coined the term "choral symphony", built on this concept in his "dramatic symphony" Roméo et Juliette while 
explaining his intent in the five-paragraph introduction in that work's score (Berlioz 1857, 1). In Beethoven's Pastoral Symphony, 
a program work, the composer inserted a "storm" section before the final movement; Berlioz's Symphonie fantastique, a work famous for 
its exceptional orchestration is also a programme work and has both a march and a waltz and five movements instead of the customary four.

At the beginning of the 20th century, Gustav Mahler wrote long, large-scale symphonies. His Eighth Symphony, for example, 
was composed in 1906 and is nicknamed the "Symphony of a Thousand" because of the forces required to perform it. The 20th 
century also saw further diversification in the style and content of works that composers labeled symphonies (Anon. 2008). 
Some composers, including Dmitri Shostakovich, Sergei Rachmaninoff, and Carl Nielsen, continued to write in the traditional 
four-movement form, while other composers took different approaches: Jean Sibelius' Symphony No. 7, his last, is in one movement, 
whereas Alan Hovhaness's Symphony No. 9, Saint Vartan—originally op. 80, changed to op. 180—composed in 1949–50, is in twenty-four.