Johannes Brahms (7 May 1833 – 3 April 1897) was a German composer and pianist, and one of the leading musicians of the Romantic period.
 Born in Hamburg, Brahms spent much of his professional life in Vienna, Austria, where he was a leader of the musical scene. In his
 lifetime, Brahms' popularity and influence were considerable; following a comment by the nineteenth-century conductor Hans von Bülow, 
he is sometimes grouped with Johann Sebastian Bach and Ludwig van Beethoven as one of the Three Bs.

Brahms composed for piano, chamber ensembles, symphony orchestra, and for voice and chorus. A virtuoso pianist, he premiered many of 
his own works; he also worked with some of the leading performers of his time, including the pianist Clara Schumann and the violinist 
Joseph Joachim. Many of his works have become staples of the modern concert repertoire. Brahms, an uncompromising perfectionist, destroyed
 many of his works and left some of them unpublished.

Brahms is often considered both a traditionalist and an innovator. His music is firmly rooted in the structures and compositional 
techniques of the Baroque and Classical masters. He was a master of counterpoint, the complex and highly disciplined method of composition 
for which Bach is famous, and also of development, a compositional ethos pioneered by Joseph Haydn, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart and Ludwig van 
Beethoven. Brahms aimed to honour the "purity" of these venerable "German" structures and advance them into a Romantic idiom, in the process
 creating bold new approaches to harmony and melody. While many contemporaries found his music too academic, his contribution and 
craftsmanship have been admired by subsequent figures as diverse as the progressive Arnold Schoenberg and the conservative Edward Elgar.
 The diligent, highly constructed nature of Brahms's works was a starting point and an inspiration for a generation of composers.

Brahms wrote a number of major works for orchestra, including two serenades, four symphonies, two piano concertos
 (No. 1 in D minor; No. 2 in B flat major), a Violin Concerto, a Double Concerto for violin and cello, and two companion orchestral 
overtures, the Academic Festival Overture and the Tragic Overture.

His large choral work A German Requiem is not a setting of the liturgical Missa pro defunctis but a setting of texts which Brahms 
selected from the Lutheran Bible. The work was composed in three major periods of his life. An early version of the second movement
 was first composed in 1854, not long after Robert Schumann's attempted suicide, and this was later used in his first piano concerto.
 The majority of the Requiem was composed after his mother's death in 1865. The fifth movement was added after the official premiere
 in 1868, and the work was published in 1869.

Brahms's works in variation form include the Variations and Fugue on a Theme by Handel and the Paganini Variations, both for
 solo piano, and the Variations on a Theme by Haydn in versions for two pianos and for orchestra. The final movement of the Fourth
 Symphony, Op. 98, is formally a passacaglia.

His chamber works include three string quartets, two string quintets, two string sextets, a clarinet quintet, a clarinet trio, 
a horn trio, a piano quintet, three piano quartets, and four piano trios (the fourth being published posthumously). He composed several
 instrumental sonatas with piano, including three for violin, two for cello, and two for clarinet (which were subsequently arranged for
 viola by the composer). His solo piano works range from his early piano sonatas and ballades to his late sets of character pieces.
 Brahms was a significant Lieder composer, who wrote over 200 songs. His chorale preludes for organ, Op. 122, which he wrote shortly 
before his death, have become an important part of the organist's repertoire.